Chapter 1

Tied Up With String

Calling it a cover-up would be far too dramatic. But for more than half a century even in the midst of some of the greatest
scientific achievements in history physicists have been quietly aware of a dark cloud looming on a distant horizon. The problem
is this: There are two foundational pillars upon which modern physics rests. One is Albert Einstein's general relativity, which
provides a theoretical framework for understanding the universe on the largest of scales: stars, galaxies, clusters of galaxies, and
beyond to the immense expanse of the universe itself. The other is quantum mechanics, which provides a theoretical framework for
understanding the universe on the smallest of scales: molecules, atoms, and all the way down to subatomic particles like electrons
and quarks. Through years of research, physicists have experimentally confirmed to almost unimaginable accuracy virtually all
predictions made by each of these theories. But these same theoretical tools inexorably lead to another disturbing conclusion: As
they are currently formulated, general relativity and quantum mechanics cannot both be right. The two theories underlying the
tremendous progress of physics during the last hundred years progress that has explained the expansion of the heavens and the
fundamental structure of matter are mutually incompatible

If you have not heard previously about this ferocious antagonism you may be wondering why. The answer is not hard to come by.
In all but the most extreme situations, physicists study things that are either small and light (like atoms and their constituents) or
things that are huge and heavy (like stars and galaxies), but not both. This means that they need use only quantum mechanics or
only general relativity and can, with a furtive glance, shrug off the barking admonition of the other. For fifty years this approach
has not been quite as blissful as ignorance, but it has been pretty close.
But the universe can be extreme. In the central depths of a black hole an enormous mass is crushed to a minuscule size. At the
moment of the big bang the whole of the universe erupted from a microscopic nugget whose size makes a grain of sand look
colossal. These are realms that are tiny and yet incredibly massive, therefore requiring that both quantum mechanics and general
relativity simultaneously be brought to bear. For reasons that will become increasingly clear as we proceed, the equations of
general relativity and quantum mechanics, when combined, begin to shake, rattle, and gush with steam like a red-lined automobile.
Put less figuratively, well-posed physical questions elicit nonsensical answers from the unhappy amalgam of these two theories.
Even if you are willing to keep the deep interior of a black hole and the beginning of the universe shrouded in mystery, you can't
help feeling that the hostility between quantum mechanics and general relativity cries out for a deeper level of understanding. Can
it really be that the universe at its most fundamental level is divided, requiring one set of laws when things are large and a different,
incompatible set when things are small?

Superstring theory, a young upstart compared with the venerable edifices of quantum mechanics and general relativity, answers
with a resounding no. Intense research over the past decade by physicists and mathematicians around the world has revealed that
this new approach to describing matter at its most fundamental level resolves the tension between general relativity and quantum
mechanics. In fact, superstring theory shows more: Within this new framework, general relativity and quantum mechanics require
one another for the theory to make sense. According to superstring theory, the marriage of the laws of the large and the small is not
only happy but inevitable.
That's part of the good news. But superstring theory string theory, for short takes this union one giant step further. For three
decades, Einstein sought a unified theory of physics, one that would interweave all of nature's forces and material constituents
within a single theoretical tapestry. He failed. Now, at the dawn of the new millennium, proponents of string theory claim that the
threads of this elusive unified tapestry finally have been revealed. String theory has the potential to show that all of the wondrous
happenings in the universe from the frantic dance of subatomic quarks to the stately waltz of orbiting binary stars, from the
primordial fireball of the big bang to the majestic swirl of heavenly galaxies are reflections of one grand physical principle, on
master equation.
Because these features of string theory require that we drastically change our understanding of space, time, and matter, they will
take some time to get used to, to sink in at a comfortable level. But as shall become clear, when seen in its proper context, string
theory emerges as a dramatic yet natural outgrowth of the revolutionary discoveries of physics during the past hundred years. In
fact, we shall see that the conflict between general relativity and quantum mechanics is actually not the first, but the third in a
sequence of pivotal conflicts encountered during the past century, each of whose resolution has resulted in a stunning revision of
our understanding of the universe.

The Three Conflicts

The first conflict, recognized as far back as the late 1800s, concerns puzzling properties of the motion of light. Briefly put,
according to Isaac Newton's laws of motion, if you run fast enough you can catch up with a departing beam of light, whereas
according to James Clerk Maxwell's laws of electromagnetism, you can't. As we will discuss in Chapter 2, Einstein resolved this
conflict through his theory of special relativity, and in so doing completely overturned our understanding of space and time.
According to special relativity, no longer can space and time be thought of as universal concepts set in stone, experienced
identically by everyone. Rather, space and time emerged from Einstein's reworking as malleable constructs whose form and
appearance depend on one's state of motion.
The development of special relativity immediately set the stage for the second conflict. One conclusion of Einstein's work is that no
object in fact, no influence or disturbance of any sort can travel faster than the speed of light. But, as we shall discuss 
Chapter 3, Newton's experimentally successful and intuitively pleasing universal theory of gravitation involves influences that are
transmitted over vast distances of space instantaneously. It was Einstein, again, who stepped in and resolved the conflict by
offering a new conception of gravity with his 1915 general theory of relativity. Just as special relativity overturned previous
conceptions of space and time, so too did general relativity. Not only are space and time influenced by one's state of motion, but
they can warp and curve in response to the presence of matter or energy. Such distortions to the fabric of space and time, as we
shall see, transmit the force of gravity from one place to another. Space and time, therefore, can no longer to be thought of as an
inert backdrop on which the events of the universe play themselves out; rather, through special and then general relativity, they are
intimate players in the events themselves.

Once again the pattern repeated itself: The discovery of general relativity, while resolving one conflict, led to another. Over the
course of the three decades beginning in 1900, physicists developed quantum mechanics (discussed in Chapter 4) in response to a
number of glaring problems that arose when nineteenth-century conceptions of physics were applied to the microscopic world. And
as mentioned above, the third and deepest conflict arises from the incompatibility between quantum mechanics and general
relativity. As we will see in Chapter 5, the gently curving geometrical form of space emerging from general relativity is at
loggerheads with the frantic, roiling, microscopic behavior of the universe implied by quantum mechanics. As it was not until the
mid-1980s that string theory offered a resolution, this conflict is rightly called the central problem of modern physics. Moreover,
building on special and general relativity, string theory requires its own severe revamping of our conceptions of space and time.
For example, most of us take for granted that our universe has three spatial dimensions. But this is not so according to string
theory, which claims that our universe has many more dimensions than meet the eye dimensions that are tightly curled into the
folded fabric of the cosmos. So central are these remarkable insights into the nature of space and time that we shall use them as a
guiding theme in all that follows. String theory, in a real sense, is the story of space and time since Einstein.
To appreciate what string theory actually is, we need to take a step back and briefly describe what we have learned during the last
century about the microscopic structure of the universe.

The Universe at Its Smallest: What We Know about Matter

The ancient Greeks surmised that the stuff of the universe was made up of tiny "uncuttable" ingredients that they called atoms. Just
as the enormous number of words in an alphabetic language is built up from the wealth of combinations of a small number of
letters, they guessed that the vast range of material objects might also result from combinations of a small number of distinct,
elementary building blocks. It was a prescient guess. More than 2,000 years later we still believe it to be true, although the identity
of the most fundamental units has gone through numerous revisions. In the nineteenth century scientists showed that many familiar
substances such as oxygen and carbon had a smallest recognizable constituent; following in the tradition laid down by the Greeks,
they called them atoms. The name stuck, but history has shown it to be a misnomer, since atoms surely are "cuttable." By the early
1930s the collective works of J. J. Thomson, Ernest Rutherford, Niels Bohr, and James Chadwick had established the solar
system–like atomic model with which most of us are familiar. Far from being the most elementary material constituent, atoms
consist of a nucleus, containing protons and neutrons, that is surrounded by a swarm of orbiting electrons.
For a while many physicists thought that protons, neutrons, and electrons were the Greeks' "atoms." But in 1968 experimenters at
the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, making use of the increased capacity of technology to probe the microscopic depths of
matter, found that protons and neutrons are not fundamental, either. Instead they showed that each consists of three smaller
particles, called quarks a whimsical name taken from a passage in James Joyce's Finnegan's Wake by the theoretical physicist
